---
title: "Post: Dietary Modification in Type 2 Diabetes Management"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Recommendations
  - Diabetes
---

In general, individuals with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) should adhere to nutritional guidelines aimed at reducing body weight and enhancing metabolic control for improved outcomes. Embracing a Mediterranean-style eating pattern has demonstrated positive impacts on glycemic control, lipid profiles, and blood pressure. When supplemented with olive oil or nuts, as seen in the non-randomized PREvencion con Dieta MEDiterranea (PREDIMED) study involving individuals at high cardiovascular (CV) risk (49% with T2DM), there was a notable 28–31% reduction in the risk of Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease (ASCVD). Recent findings from the Coronary Diet Intervention With Olive Oil and Cardiovascular Prevention (CORDIOPREV) study further affirmed the benefits of a Mediterranean diet, indicating that male patients with established Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) derived more advantage from this diet than from a low-fat diet intervention over a 7-year follow-up period. Shifting from an animal-based to a plant-based dietary pattern may also mitigate ASCVD risk.
Contrary to expectations, data from studies on n–3 fatty acid supplementation do not support recommending such supplements for secondary prevention of Cardiovascular Disease (CVD) in T2DM. Advisably, the consumption of sugars, sugar-sweetened beverages, and fruit juices should be minimized. Additionally, alcohol intake should generally be moderate, as even minimal amounts uniformly elevate blood pressure (BP) and Body Mass Index (BMI). A high-protein diet (30% protein, 40% carbohydrates, and 30% fat) appears superior to a standard-protein diet (15% protein, 55% carbohydrates, and 30% fat) in overweight and obese patients with Heart Failure (HF), showcasing greater reductions in CV risk factors, including HbA1c, cholesterol, triglycerides, and BP.
For those with both Cardiovascular Disease (CVD) and T2DM, reducing sodium intake is strongly recommended, potentially leading to an average reduction of 5.8 mmHg in systolic BP for hypertensive patients and 1.9 mmHg for normotensive individuals. Meta-analytically, a 20% relative reduction in ASCVD events was observed by reducing salt intake by 2.5 g/day in hypertensive and normotensive populations. Furthermore, salt substitution involving reduced sodium and increased potassium levels has demonstrated efficacy in reducing stroke, CVD, and overall mortality in high CV risk patients.